Man Page
---


bal(1)                                                       General Commands Manual                                                       bal(1)

NAME
       bal - for keeping accounts in order and studying past spending habits

SYNOPSIS
       bal [-f FILE] [-l CODE] [-s] [COMMAND]

DESCRIPTION
       bal  keeps  track of personal accounts and spending.  It is extensible using Guile Scheme, a full programming language, so that it is easy
       to build arbitrary reports about your past transactions and to script the program to automatically add or update transactions  when  arbi‐
       trary  conditions  are met (you could, say, write a piece of Scheme code that fetches the latest stock price and updates the current value
       of your shares).

       bal's main interactive commands are:

       aa     add account

       at     add transaction to current account

       ea     rename account

       et     edit transaction

       da     delete account

       dt     delete transaction

       t      transfer from one account to another

       la     list accounts and current totals

       lt     list most recent transactions in current account (change number to list by modifying the variable bal/number-to-quick-list)

       ltn    list most recent transactions in current account, prompt for number to list

       bt     total accounts by type (income, expense, asset, liability)

       re     list transactions in current account matching a regular expression

       sa     set current account

       ca     display current account

       w      write accounts to file

       r      read save accounts from file

       p X    print X, a Scheme expression

       q      quit, unless -s specified, prompt to save before quit

OPTIONS
       -f FILE
              load accounts from FILE where FILE omits the .btar extension

       -l CODE
              execute Scheme code in file CODE

       -s     do not prompt to save on exit

       COMMAND
              execute COMMAND as if it was entered at bal's prompt and then exit

FILES
       bal executes Scheme code in ~/.balrc.scm if the file is present.

SEE ALSO
BUGS
AUTHOR
       Zach Flynn <zlflynn@gmail.com>

                                                                    2018-10-16                                                             bal(1)

---

bal is an interactive and scriptable command line personal accounting program to keep your books in order and to study past spending habits. It can be scripted and extended using Guile, a simple programming language (a Scheme dialect) from the GNU project (https://www.gnu.org/software/guile/).  Scripts can be written, for example, to automatically add transactions on the first of the month or even to update stock balances by fetching the latest stock price from the internet, or to produce custom reports on past spending habits (for example, a report of monthly spending on transactions with "coffee" in their description output to some CSV to be plotted in R).

---

At the prompt, any Scheme function can be entered (except that the usual outside parenthesis should be omitted; for example - display "hello, world" - is translated into the Scheme command - (display "hello, world") - and prints "hello, world").  But you do not need to know any Scheme to use bal, just to extend it.

In fact, the above commands are Scheme functions.  To see their source code, look at the function called "bal_standard_func()" in bal.c.  The interactive commands above use the function "bal/call" to prompt the user for their options. Non-interactive versions of most of the commands XX are usually called "bal/XX" and take their arguments in the standard way to pass arguments to functions in Scheme.  If you are familiar with Emacs, "bal/call" has a similar purpose as the Emacs Lisp "interactive" function, used to make Scheme functions interactive.

---

The saved file is a tar archive with a number of CSV files, describing the accounts and the transactions in the accounts. The files are human-readable and easy to open as data in R, libreoffice, gnumeric, or another spreadsheet program.

---

The source code is a single C file (bal.c) which has some Scheme in it as well.  It is about 1700 lines of code as of 2018-10-10.

If you find yourself wanting to write an extension that has a similar feel to the main editing commands, see the function "bal_standard_functions ()" in the C source code and the "bal_call" C function (can call as "bal/call" in Scheme).

The prompt is whatever is returned by the evaluating the Scheme expression "(bal/prompt)" so redefining this function can customize your prompt to show additional information.  By default, the prompt indicates what the current account is, see the definition of bal/prompt in "bal_standard_functions()" in bal.c.

bal/call has the following format:

(bal/call "function name to call" (list (cons "Account" "account") (cons "File" "string") ...))

Where the first option is the function name to call and the second is a list with pairs giving the command prompt to print to ask for input and the second argument specifies the type of argument.

---

bal is Free Software, licensed under the terms of the GPL version 3.  You are free to modify and redistribute the software so long as you allow others to do the same with your modified version.  See COPYING for details.

---

To compile bal, type: make

bal depends on libreadline, libcsv, libguile, and libgc to compile.

bal expects the programs tar, mkdir, rm, and mktemp to be on the path.  It has only been tested with the GNU versions of these utilities.  Let me know if I accidently used something non-portable to BSD or similar, and I will fix it.  

---

It would be possible to write another user interface for bal in Scheme (a more graphical interface) that calls the core functions in the background.  The way you would hook it in would be something like:

bal -l gui.scm startgui

where (startgui) is the Scheme function to start the user interface (defined in gui.scm).

---

How do I schedule a recurring transfer in bal?

Use cron (this also works for a recurring... anything).  Just have cron run the following script at your desired frequency:

/path/to/bal -f /path/to/yourbalfile -s bal/t "$to_account_name" "$from_account_name" $amount "$description" "$(/bin/date +%Y-%m-%d)"

